<!--
title: Practical session 3
paginate: true

_class: titlepage
-->

# Practical session 3
<br>

## *Remember that there is no code faster than no code.* - Taligent's Guide to Designing Programs
<br>

#### Development Tools for Scientific Computing 2024/2025

###### Pasquale Claudio Africa, Dario Coscia

###### 20 Feb 2025

---


# Part 1: How to make kNN faster?

In the previous practical session (number 2), we implemented a basic k-Nearest Neighbors (kNN) algorithm. In today's session, we will focus on optimizing the performance of the kNN implementation—an essential step when dealing with large datasets.
We will look at one specific library called [Numba](https://numba.pydata.org/), but other options are available [FAISS](https://github.com/facebookresearch/faiss), [Cython](https://cython.org/) or [PyPy](https://pypy.org/features.html). 

The objective for today is to implement a fast kNN and utilize a profiler to identify bottlenecks in the code that can be optimized further. By the end of the session, you will have a more efficient version of the kNN algorithm, suitable for handling large-scale data.

---

## Notes on Numba
Numba is a compiler for Python array and numerical functions that gives 
you the power to speed up your applications with high performance
functions written directly in Python.

Numba generates optimized machine code from pure Python code using
the [LLVM compiler infrastructure](http://llvm.org/).  With a few simple
annotations, array-oriented and math-heavy Python code can be
just-in-time optimized to performance similar as C, C++ and Fortran, without
having to switch languages or Python interpreters.

Numba's main features are:

* on-the-fly code generation `jit`  (at import time or runtime, at the
  user's preference)
* integration with the Python scientific software stack (thanks to Numpy)

---
Here is how a Numba-optimized function, taking a Numpy array as argument,
might look like:

```python
# jit compilation
@numba.jit(....)
def sum2d_jit(arr):
    M, N = arr.shape
    result = 0.0
    for i in range(M):
        for j in range(N):
            result += arr[i,j]
    return result
# aot compilation
cc = CC('module')
@cc.export('sum2d_aot', 'f8(f8[:])')
def sum2d_aot(arr):
    M, N = arr.shape
    result = 0.0
    for i in range(M):
        for j in range(N):
            result += arr[i,j]
    return result

if __name__ == "__main__":
    cc.compile()  # <- we need to compile the code!
```

---

## JIT or AOT ?

There are two ways to compile the code:
1. Just In Time compilation: Compilation of a function at execution time
2. Ahead Of Time compilation: Compilation of a function in a separate step before running the program code, producing an on-disk binary object which can be distributed independently.  This is the traditional kind of compilation known
in languages such as C, C++ or Fortran.

While Numba's main use case is `Just-in-Time compilation` (easier), it also
provides a facility for `Ahead-of-Time compilation` (AOT). 

---

## More on AOT

AOT compilation produces a compiled extension module which does not depend
on Numba: you can distribute the module on machines which do not have
Numba installed (but Numpy is required). BUT... You have to specify function signatures explicitly; each exported function can have only one signature; and AOT compilation produces generic code for your CPU's architectural family
(for example "x86-64"), while JIT compilation produces code optimized for your particular CPU model. Today we will use [AOT](https://numba.pydata.org/numba-doc/dev/user/pycc.html) compilation.


---

# Part 2: Profiling the code

We will use [line-profiler](https://github.com/pyutils/line_profiler) to profile the code.
Go into `devtools_scicomp_project_2025` create starting from `knn_classifier` branch, a new one titled `optimized_knn_classifier`. This is the branch we will work on today.
1. **Install Numba and Line Profiler**:
- Activate the conda environment `devtools_scicomp` and install `numba` and `line_profiler`. Add it to the `requirements.txt`.
2. **Modify and profile old code**
- Add the `@profile` decorator into `distance` and `majority_vote` functions in `src/pyclassify/utils.py` and all
methods (except for `__init__`) inside the `src/pyclassify/classify.py`. Note that the profilation does not happen if `LINE_PROFILE` flag is not set to `1`.
---
- Create a directory called `logs` inside the root directory, this is where we are going to store the profiler files. Profile the code by running:
    ```bash
    python -m kernprof -l -o logs/profile.dat scripts/run.py --config=experiments/config
    ```
- Inspect the results and save them into `logs/slow_knn_classifier.txt`. Where is the bottleneck? 

---

# Part 3: Profiling the Numpy code

- Modify the code to work **also** with numpy arrays. 
    - The `kNN` class `__init__` must take an extra argument called `backhand`, this argument must either be `plain` (default) or `numpy`, otherwise a `ValueError` is raised. Change the tests accordingly. 
    - In `src/pyclassify/utils.py` create a function called `distance_numpy` which is the numpy implementation of the `distance function`.
    - Create an attribute `distance` in `kNN` which stores the function used to compute the distance between points. This attribute must be set dynamically depending on the backhand (`plain=>distance`, `numpy=>distance_numpy`). Change the `__call__` accordingly to handle data types. **NOTE** you don't need to change the whole code, you just need two add an `if` statement in `__call__`, while leaving other methods unchanged.
    
---

- Change the `scripts/run.py` file in order to pass `backhand` from the config. Create in `experiments` a `config_numpy.yaml` file, where `backhand` is set to `numpy`.

- Profile and inspect the results, save them into `logs/numpy_knn_classifier.txt`. Do we get similar performances? How much speedup do we obtain by using `distance_numpy` function?        

---

# Part 3: Optimize code for Big Datasets

We will now use a way larger dataset called `Spambase`, in order to classify emails being spam or not. See more [here](https://archive.ics.uci.edu/dataset/94/spambase).
- In `shell` directory create a file called `submit_spam.sh` and write a bash code to download the `Spambase` dataset. **NOTE** the code must only download the dataset and position it in the `data/` folder, all the additional files downloaded must be removed by the bash script.
- Create in `experiments` a `config_spambase.yaml` file where the `dataset` entry points to the `Spambase` dataset and the `backhand` is set to `numpy`. Also modify `read_file` function in `src/pyclassify/utils.py` to handle binary labels (`0`, `1 `). Finally modify `scripts/run.py` to shuffle the data if not done in the previous lecture.
- Profile and inspect the results, save them into `logs/spam_numpy_knn_classifier.txt`. Which part of the code needs optimization?

---

- In `src/pyclassify/utils.py` write a highly optimized `distance_numba` function using AOT compilation. HINT: I suggest to create a python file (later you should erase it) just for the functions to optimize and do some tests of speedup for small and big size arrays. Note that since we are doing aot compilation there is the need to [compile](https://numba.pydata.org/numba-doc/dev/user/pycc.html) the code. To optimize look at the following [flags](https://numba.pydata.org/numba-doc/dev/user/jit.html). 
- Modify the `kNN.__init__` method to allow `numba` as `backhand`. 
- Once the code is optimized, profile and inspect the results, save them into `logs/spam_numba_knn_classifier.txt`. How much was the speedup? Why?
- Perform a study on how fast is your implementation of distance compared to plain numpy for varying the dimensions of $d$ and $n=1$. Plot the figure and save it (`scalability.py`) inside the `logs/` directory.

---

# Solutions

The repository with the solution is reported here: [GitHub repo](https://github.com/dario-coscia/devtools_scicomp_project_2025/tree/knn_classifier)
