<!--
title: Practical session 01
paginate: true

_class: titlepage
-->

# Practical session 01
<br>

## *Everybody has to start somewhere* -- Haruki Murakami 
<br>

#### Development Tools for Scientific Computing 2024/2025

###### Pasquale Claudio Africa, Dario Coscia

###### 11 Feb 2025

---


# Part 1: Setting Up Your Development Environment

1. **Install Required Tools**:
   - Ensure that Python is installed on your system.
   - Install Git, and create a GitHub account if you haven't already.
   - Install Miniconda on your system (refer to the installation guide [here](https://docs.anaconda.com/miniconda/)).

---
2. **Set Up a Git Repository and Virtual Environment**:
   - Open your terminal and create a conda environment named `devtools_scicomp` with Python 3.9 by running:  
     ```bash
     conda create --name devtools_scicomp python=3.9
     ```
   - Install essential packages by running:  
     ```bash
     python -m pip install pytest
     ```
     **Note**: Always install packages inside the conda environment using `python -m pip`, which ensures that you're using the Python interpreter and `pip` package manager within the environment.
   - Open [GitHub](https://github.com/) in your web browser and follow these steps:
        1. Create a new empty repository titled `devtools_scicomp_project_2025`, and select a specific license and the Python `.gitignore` file.
        2. Open your terminal or command prompt, clone the repository, create a `README.md` file, and push your changes to the origin with the commit message `first commit`.

**A Small Note on Pushing**:
   - Add your changes using:
     ```bash
     git add [FILES]
     ```
   - Commit your changes with:
     ```bash
     git commit -m "[COMMIT MESSAGE]"
     ```
   - Push your commits with:
     ```bash
     git push origin HEAD:main
     ```

---

# Part 2: Structuring the Package

1. **Create the Package Structure**:
   - Inside your cloned GitHub repository, create the following directories: `src/pyclassify/`, `scripts`, `test`, `shell`, and `experiments`.
   - Inside the `src/pyclassify/` directory, create an `__init__.py` and `utils.py` file.
   - Inside the `scripts/` directory, create an `run.py` file.
   - Inside the `shell/` directory, create an `submit.sbatch` and `submit.sh` file.
   - Inside the `experiments/` directory, create an `config.yaml` file.
   - Inside the `test/` directory, create an `test_.py` file.
   - Generate a `requirements.txt` file from the `devtools_scicomp` conda environment by running:
     ```bash
     python -m pip freeze > requirements.txt
     ```
     Add the `requirements.txt` file to the root of your project folder (`devtools_scicomp_project_2025/`).
---

   - Create a `pyproject.toml` file for your project from [this template](https://github.com/dario-coscia/devtools_scicomp_project_2025/blob/main/pyproject.toml), and complete the `[INSERT]` placeholders.
   - Add in the `.gitignore` file a removal of `.dat` and `.data` files.
   - Add, commit, and push these changes to the origin repository with the commit message `structuring the package`.

# Solutions
The repository with the right structure and commits is reported here: [GitHub repo](https://github.com/dario-coscia/devtools_scicomp_project_2025/tree/main)